update Baking with the possibility of staking (#463)
trilitech/tezos-developer-docs: docs/architecture/baking.md

> Bakers are daemons complementary to Tezos nodes that cooperate to achieve consensus about the next block to add.

Reviewer: We don't use _daemon_ in Octez. We say baking software/binaries/executables.

Technically speaking the baker is not a _daemon_, as it does not run in the background (and the user can C-c / C-z it). You can run it as a service, but the baker is not ...sshd

Author: replaced by executables

Author: I'm not sure it's so important. We do use "daemons" in many places in the Octez doc (see <https://tezos.gitlab.io/search.html?q=daemon#>), but I changed it here to be more accessible.

Delegates temporarily stake tez as a security deposit to ensure that they are acting according to the rules of the protocol.
Deposits can be "unstaked" later, either partially (at any time) or totally (when bakers stop baking).
There is a delay of a certain number of cycles from the moment when the tez are staked until the delegate can begin baking.
Similarly, when tez are unstaked, they are unlocked after a certain number of cycles.
Staked tez may be slashed by the protocol if the baker misbehaves (e.g., proposes or attests two different blocks for the same level).

A delegate participates in consensus in proportion to their _baking power_: the more baking power a delegate has, the more likely it is to be selected to bake or to validate blocks and thus receive the rewards.
The baking power of a delegate is computed from the amounts of tez staked (by its own and by all its stakers) and owned (by its own and by all its delegators), knowing that non-staked tez are weighted half as much as staked tez in the sum.

The delegate must have a baking power of at least 6,000 tez to be allowed to bake.

> A delegate also participates in [governance](./governance) in proportion to their _voting power_.

Reviewer 2: Use root-relative links to avoid a Docusaurus routing problem:
```suggestion
A delegate also participates in [governance](/architecture/governance) in proportion to their _voting power_.
```

> 

Reviewer: > The baking process includes many steps that Tezos users and developers don't need to think about, but at a basic level, baking a block follows these steps:
> 1. The protocol selects in advance a list of bakers for each block to create in a _cycle_, which is a certain number of blocks.
> 1. It also selects a list of bakers to act as validators.

- I understand that in Tenderbake/Tendermint the members of the consensus comitte are called `validators`. But this is confusing for a high-level doc.  We sometimes explain "baker" to non-Tezos folks as 'validators' because it is the generic term for block producers in PoS.

- Validators are **bakers**. Only bakers can be part of the consensus comitte,  
- Also, there is no separate selection here. Tenderbake selects a consensus commitee per level, and sorts the bakers by slot to determine the order.
 
> These bakers are responsible for attesting the blocks that other bakers create and publishing _attestations_ that the block is valid.
> 1. The first baker on the list has a certain amount of time to create the next block.
>  It packages pending operations into a block, signs it, and distributes it to the validators and other nodes.

It is distributed to everybody via the P2P network.

1. If the first baker doesn't publish a block in time, the next baker on the list has a certain amount of time to bake a block, and so on until a block is created.

> 1. The validators verify the block and publish their attestations in future blocks.
This sounds as if validators choose when to include them. Bakers send pre-attestations when they seen the block proposals, and attestation when they observe that a pre-quorum has been agreed (modulo rules on locking on proposals etc).  but they send them right away. This is the key into delays and higher rounds

> 1. The next list of bakers create the next block, until the end of the cycle.

This is missing the pre-attestation phase.  I'm not sure this is deliberate, or this is the cause of an original description based on Emmy that was patched to accomodate for Tenderbake.

Author: I added a note talking about pre-attestations and round, although I'm not sure these details are needed at this level. I kept "validators" as the "other" role of bakers, which translates in (pre-)attestations.

## Becoming a baker

> To become a baker, you must create an account to act as a _delegate_, which is an account that is authorized to bake blocks and attest blocks that other accounts bake, and also to receive delegations from other accounts (as explained later).

Reviewer: delegations and stake from other accounts.

We should move the introduction of the term _delegate_ up front, when we describe the baker role.

Author: I added "delegations (and stake)".

I don't think we should move the definition earlier, because above we only explain the roles of a baker: creating and (pre)attesting blocks. The role as a delegate comes into play only here.

The whole idea of this page is to present a more accessible view of Tezos, omitting full details from the start. I think Tim did a great job when writing this page, and we should not overload it too much. But of course, we have to avoid stating things that are (too) false.

Delegates temporarily stake tez as a security deposit to ensure that they are acting according to the rules of the protocol.

> There is a delay of a certain number of cycles from the moment when the tez are staked until the delegate can begin baking.

Reviewer: From the moment that the baker is registered as a delegate + when the tez are staked.

Author: Well, "the delegate" means that the baker has registered as a delegate.

> Similarly, when bakers stop baking, their stake is unlocked after a certain number of cycles.

Reviewer: This is a stale description from the old system. In the new Staking mechanism tez doesn't unlock on its own. The baker has to:
- unstake everything
- finalize stakes after 4 cycles.

Author: Good spot. I added a mention of unstaking and the relevant delay.

> While it is locked, the security deposit may be slashed by the protocol if the baker misbehaves (e.g., proposes or attests two different blocks for the same level).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Staked tez  may be slashed by the protocol if the baker misbehaves (e.g., proposes or attests two different blocks for the same level).
```
The notion of _frozen security deposit_ is more internal now.

> A delegate participates in consensus in proportion to their _baking power_: the more baking power a delegate has, the more likely it is to be selected to bake or to validate blocks and thus receive the rewards.

Reviewer: It is not _more likely_, but _more often_. In the limit, a baker that has 3 time more stake than other, should have 3 time more rights.

It also affects the number of consensus committee slots.

Author: More likely translates (likely) into more selections, and more slots (this is expressed by "to validate blocks"). It seems right enough.

> The baking power of a delegate is computed from the amounts of tez owned by its own and by all the accounts that delegate to it, knowing that non-staked tez are weighted half as much as staked tez in the sum.

Reviewer: The baking power is computed by the staked balance of the baker (from its own stake, plus that of their stakers)  and the delegated balance (their own, their stakers and delegators).

Delegated tez give rights to half their nominal tez value.

Reviewer: NB: We should flag already in some issue what might need to be updated for Quebec (that is, that the baking formula changes)

Author: Thanks, I rewrote along your suggestions, but keeping it a bit more accessible.

> The delegate must have a baking power of at least 6,000 tez to be allowed to bake.

Reviewer: To be assigned rights.

Author: boy, keep it simple

A delegate also participates in [governance](./governance) in proportion to their _voting power_.

> The voting power of a delegate is similar to the baking power except that no distinctions is made between staked and non-staked tez.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The voting power of a delegate is similar to the baking power except that no distinctions is made between staked and delegated tez.
```

non-staked is not the same as delegated tez.

 unstaked tez don't give any rights.

Author: I read "Non-staked tez owned by delegates and delegators are called delegated tez." at <https://tezos.gitlab.io/alpha/baking_power.html#delegated-tez>.

Anyways, I rewrote as "no matter whether they are staked or not.", as presented in <https://tezos.gitlab.io/alpha/voting.html#voting-power>.

Bakers must run at least one Tezos node and a baker daemon to go with it.

> These daemons must run at all times with a stable power source and internet connection, because periods of inactivity for a baker entail losses of rewards, and eventually being marked as inactive and temporarily excluded from baking.

Reviewer: Baking software

Author: I already applied you suggestion from a previous thread, thanks.
I also changed "daemons" by "services", along your advice.

## Delegating to a baker

If you don't have enough tez to become a baker or don't want to run a baking node, you can choose a baker as your delegate, which makes you a _delegator_.
The delegate doesn't have control over your tez and you can spend your tez at any time or withdraw your delegation, but half of the tez that you delegate counts toward the baking power of the delegate. Also, delegated tez increase the voting power of your baker: a delegate's voting power is the sum of its own tez plus the tez delegated to it.

> In exchange, delegates may share some part of their rewards with you, in proportion to the amount of tez that you currently have.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In exchange, delegates may share some part of their rewards with you, in proportion to the amount of available tez in your account (technically, the minimal balance during each cycle). 
```

Check your delegate's conditions for distributing rewards.

Delegating incurs no risk for the delegator: the delegate has no control over the tez and the delegator is not punished if the delegate misbehaves.

> ## Staking with a baker

Reviewer: This is missing;
- The finalization process.
- That the baker needs to accept staking (and staking parameters in general)
- That stakes don't leave your account, are frozen in your account, but are consider part of the baker's security deposit and can be slashed.

Reviewer: - Staking rewards accrue automatically, and are allocated by the protocol. Stakers earn rewards whenever their bakers do, and don't have to wait for the baker to distribute them (like delegation rewards)

Author: Thanks, I applied all your suggestions but the finalization stuff, which seems too much of a detail here.

> If you want to get a bigger share of your delegate's rewards, you can temporarily stake any amount of tez from your account on behalf of your baker.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to get a bigger share of your delegate's rewards, you can temporarily stake any amount of tez from your account on behalf of your baker.
```
with your baker? We use this in other comms.

Author: changed to "with"

All the tez you stake contribute to the baker's security deposit, and are locked under the same conditions as the baker's own staked tez, hence are slashed if the baker misbehaves.
In exchange of agreeing to temporarily lock these tez and sharing the risks with your delegate, you get a bigger share of the delegate's rewards.

Later on, you may choose to unstake part or all of the staked tez, that will be unlocked after a certain delay.

> To stake tez, you start by delegating to a baker's account, then you stake a certain amount of your tez to the baker.

Reviewer: You start by choosing a baker as your delegate, if you haven't done so already, and then you decide how much you stake.

Reviewer: It might be good to clarify that you can only stake with **one** baker.

Reviewer: That is, a staker is a delegator that stakes tez with the chosen baker.

Author: Clarified.

Delegates temporarily stake tez as a security deposit to ensure that they are acting according to the rules of the protocol.

> This stake stays locked for a certain number of cycles before the delegate can begin baking.

Author: Rewrote along this idea, not diving into more precise details, though.

Similarly, when bakers stop baking, their stake is unlocked after a certain number of cycles.
While it is locked, the security deposit may be slashed by the protocol if the baker misbehaves (e.g., proposes or attests two different blocks for the same level).

The delegate must stake at least least 600 tez from its own account,

> and must also represent at least 6,000 tez of "active stake", which is computed

Author: It seems you are reviewing an old version of the page. This paragraph has been completely rewritten in commit f030737899e7feb4ccf76bb77717fee167790737 so that it doesn't mention anymore the 600 tez, nor the active stake. Please update your branch and review again.

> from the tez in its own account and from the tez of all its delegators accounts.

Author: idem

> The more active stake a delegate represents, the more likely it is to be selected to bake a block and thus receive the rewards.

Author: idem

> Bakers must run at least one Tezos node and a baker daemon to go with it.

Author: idem

> These daemons must run at all times with a stable power source and internet connection, because inactive bakers are automatically removed from the network.

Author: I incorporated your remarks, thanks.

## Delegating to a baker

If you don't have enough tez to become a baker or don't want to run a baking node, you can choose a baker as your delegate, which makes you a _delegator_.
The delegate doesn't have control over your tez and you can spend your tez at any time or withdraw your delegation, but half of the tez that you delegate counts toward the amount of active stake that the delegate has for baking purposes.

> Delegators receive a share of the delegate's rewards in proportion to the amount of tez that they currently have.

Reviewer 3: Only if the baker want to rewards delegators. Some delegators don't receive a share and even more now with staking

Author: Right, I updated this phrase to mention this conditionally.

Author: @AurelienMonteillet I cannot assign the MR to you, for some obscure reason, please check this thread.

Author: closed on timeout

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Bakers accept delegated tez because delegated tez counts toward their own tez for certain purposes:

- Delegated tez carries voting power; a delegate's voting power is the sum of its own tez plus the tez delegated to it
- Delegated tez carries baking power; 50% of delegated tez counts toward a delegate's baking power

Delegating carries no risk to the delegator; the delegate has no control over the tez and the delegator is not punished for anything that the delegate does.
```

Author: I applied this suggestion manually, because some parts were redundant with the previous paragraph.

Reviewer 2: Got it, removing this suggestion.

> ## Staking for a baker

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Staking with a baker
```

Maybe "with" is better here? Not sure.

If you want to get a bigger share of your delegate's rewards, you can temporarily stake any amount of tez from your account on behalf of your baker.
All the tez you stake contribute to the baker's security deposit, and are locked under the same conditions as the baker's own staked tez, hence are slashed if the baker misbehaves.
In exchange of agreeing to temporarily lock these tez and sharing the risks with your delegate, you get a bigger share of the delegate's rewards.

> Later on, you may choose to unstake part or all of the staked tez, that will be unlocked after a certain delay.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Later on, you may choose to unstake part or all of the staked tez, that will be unlocked after a certain delay.

To stake tez, an account starts by delegating its tez to a baker's account as usual.
Then it stakes a certain amount of that same tez to the baker.
An account always delegates all of its tez to its delegate, but it can stake any amount of that tez, which allows the account to earn staking rewards on some frozen tez while leaving some delegated tez liquid for immediate use.

## Becoming a delegator or staker

To start delegating and staking, use the app at https://stake.tezos.com to first become a delegator and then a staker.
```

Author: I applied this suggestion manually, because some parts were redundant with the previous paragraph.
(this one, too)

> ## References

Reviewer 2: I can't remove the existing references section in this PR, but I propose these new links for it:

```
## References

For more information about delegating and staking, see these pages in the Octez documentation:

- [Proof of stake](https://tezos.gitlab.io/alpha/proof_of_stake.html)
- [Delegating your coins](https://tezos.gitlab.io/introduction/howtorun.html#delegating-your-coins)
- [Staking](https://tezos.gitlab.io/alpha/staking.html)
```

Author: I think it's better to point to a single entry page in the Octez doc, and in particular to the simplest one (which links to more in-depths pages), so I would keep the existing pointer while just fixing its URL.
